# Substrate Blockchains, e.g. Polkadot Can Dance As Cloud-Native

At first, it was a plain hypothesis. Then we noticed a Docker image in Dockerhub and a Dockerfile in the Polkadot repository. To quickly dispel any doubts to our suspicion, we pulled the image as described in [Polkadot's online documentation and tried to run it the Docker way](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/en/maintain-sync) or [at paritech's repo](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/blob/master/doc/docker.md).

```bash
  docker run --rm -it parity/polkadot:latest --version
```
or
```bash
  docker run -p 9944:9944 parity/polkadot:v0.8.24 --name "calling_home_from_a_docker_container" --rpc-external --ws-external
```

The result was promising for it ran as expected!  So we reckon, it could run and execute in a compute node configured as a kubernetes worker in the Openshift Platform. Again, in the interest of speed, we chose to try running it in our resource-rich laptop, by simply spinning up a single node master and worker cluster using the Openshift Code Reader Container, via ```crc start```.

As a side note though, unfortunately, we have observed that Polkadot was not designed to run as a Microservice, but rather as a monolith. We say this because of the in-built nosql RocksDB and Prometheus that seems to be tightly integrated into it as a single package in a deployment. It may be a cause for potential automation issues later, but it remains to be seen as of this time. An initial team huddle caused a debate on whether the Polkadot could be spun-up in Openshift's Kubernetes as a stateless or stateful container. It was argued that if Polkadot is configured as a Kubernetes statefulset deployment, then configuring for a no-downtime high-availability could be a challenge. So we thought and concur, to first attempt to run it as a stateless deployment, in spite of its image size (in the range of 176Mb up to 270MB), just to see from there where it goes. 

Using a kubernetes deployment.yml manifest like below, you can already savour and appreciate the blend, by simply invoking ``` kubectl apply ```. This initial sip or dip could make or break our experiment.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: polkadot
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: polkadot
  replicas: 1
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: polkadot
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: polkadot
        image: parity/polkadot:latest
        args: ["--name", "opsumo-test","--chain","westend","--ws-external","--rpc-external", "--prometheus-external"]
        ports:
        - containerPort: 9944
          name: wss
        - containerPort: 9933
          name: rpc
        - containerPort: 30333
          name: p2p
        volumeMounts:
        - mountPath: /data
          name: polkadot
      volumes:
      - name: polkadot
        persistentVolumeClaim:
          claimName: polkadot-pvc
      securityContext:
        runAsUser: 0          
```
This Kubernetes manifest could be executed using the command like below with the assumption that you have Minikube, Minishift or Openshift crc installed in your laptop with sufficient resources. And have successfuly configured a persistent volume claim, whose manifest looks like below.
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: polkadot-pvc
spec:
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1Gi
``` 
```bash
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml  
```
Another way is to run it using the Openshift CLI, oc. This is however possible only if you have configured Openshift properly, logged-in, defined a namespace and have enabled the security context to allow deployed containers to run as root (a quick, albeit temporary work-around).
```bash
oc project polkadot
oc adm policy add-scc-to-group anyuid system:authenticated
oc adm policy add-scc-to-user privileged -z default
oc adm policy add-scc-to-user anyuid -z default
oc apply -f pvc.yaml
oc apply -f deployment.yaml
oc get pods
oc logs deploy/polkadot  
```
The Linux bash oc CLI commands above enables the following:
  + Create a kubernetes namespace, in Openshift, it is equivalent to a project. It is easier to manage namespaces which is likened to workspaces, git feature branch or in this case, a project, in this manner.
  + Allow any user ID as part of the system autheticated group
  + Allow all containers to run as privileged and make it default in this namespace
  + Allow all containers to run in this namespace with any id 
  + Apply the persistent volume claim for execution
  + Apply the deployment manifest for execution
  + View all pods in the namespace, expect polkadot pod to achieve a state = running
  + For curiosity view the console logs of the running polkadot, or to debug in case there are bumps encountered

Surprisingly, it was a very successful run. Upon completion of this test run and proving that our hypothesis to be correct, we see so many possibilities and permutations of this cloud-native approach to running the Polkadot blockchain network. Such are customized optimally calibrated Polkadot, Substrate blcokchains as parachain containers, Validators, Collators, etc. We've made various executions of building our own Polkadot and Substrate in Ubuntu images in Docker. It will not be long when could complete have it in Redhat UBI via podman and use registries such as [Quay.io](https://quai.io). We could run more sophisticated CICD and feedback loops using tools ranging from Github Actions, Jenkins-X, Tekton, Terraform, Ansible and Helm combined. Monitoring tools such as Grafana and Prometheus will as instaneous for each deployment, without or with minimal reconfiguration. With such tools, blockchain applications could easily be deployed with greater efficiencies and velocities. With Blockchain of blockchains such as Polkadot, combined with Redhat Openshift, we posit therefore, will be a true Web3.0 Internet game-changer! 